Blog post about head overflow bug in calldata tuple ABI-reencoding (#187)
ethereum/solidity-blog: _posts/2022-08-04-calldata-tuple-reencoding-head-overflow-bug.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Head Overflow Bug in Calldata Tuple ABI-Reencoding.'
date: '2022-08-04'
author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---

On July 5, 2022, Chance Hudson ([@vimwitch](https://github.com/vimwitch)) from Ethereum Foundation discovered a bug in the Solidity code generator.

The earliest affected version of the compiler is 0.5.8, which introduced ABI-reencoding of calldata structs.
[Solidity version 0.8.16](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.16) released on August 04, 2022 provides a fix.

We assigned the bug a severity of "medium".

## Which Contracts are Affected?

The effects of the bug manifest when a contract performs ABI-encoding of a tuple that meets **all** of the following conditions:

> 1. Data to be encoded is stored in calldata.

Reviewer: Only the statically-sized last component needs to come from calldata, right? (i.e. [test/libsolidity/semanticTests/abiEncoderV2/calldata_struct_dynamic_and_static.sol](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/pull/13282/files#diff-46731f94379021f2c0fe9cbac446bfd7ebdd9ee8e41d993913fa70bf8ac706e7) is affected)
This point sounds to me like *all* data you want to encode has to come from calldata...

Author: Right. I simplified that too much. I was mostly thinking about the struct case or calling from outside of a contract and then everything sits in `calldata`. But yeah, with `abi.encode()` that's not necessarily the case.

Reviewer: Also without ``abi.encode()``... this should have it as well:
```
contract C {
        function g(uint[] memory a, uint[1] memory) public returns (uint) {
                return a.length;
        }
        function f(uint[1] calldata b) public returns (uint) {
                return this.g(new uint[](3), b);
        }
}
// ----
// f(uint256[1]): 0 -> 0
```
So we can, for example, just drop current point ``1`` and just add that that statically sized array needs to be in calldata.

i.e. `uint` and `bytes32`, as well as byte arrays, i.e. `bytes` and `string`.
In this case, due to tight packing of array elements, only the area past the array may need cleanup and that
area is never larger than 32 bytes.

The cleanup was being performed using a single `mstore()` instruction, which always writes exactly 32 bytes.
The cleanup was only ever required for byte arrays but was not considered harmful for `uint` and `bytes32`,
because of the order in which the encoder writes tuple components.
The space after any given tuple component was assumed to be safe to write because it would eventually be
overwritten with the data belonging to the next component.

In order to explain why the assumption turned out to be incorrect, let us take a closer look at
the layout of an ABI-encoded tuple.

### Layout and Encoding Order of Statically- and Dynamically-sized Tuples

[The ABI encoding of a tuple](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/abi-spec.html#formal-specification-of-the-encoding)
consists of two areas - the statically-sized *head* and the dynamically-sized *tail*.

> Every statically-sized component is placed directly in the head area while for dynamically-sized ones, the head contains only the offset

Reviewer: I wonder how nitpicky we should be here... is ``bytes[1]`` "statically-sized" :-)? Because things like that are "dynamically encoded" and end up in the tail as well... but not sure if the distinction is helpful or only confusing...

Author: Do we have a precise definition of "dynamically-sized" somewhere? I've always been thinking of things like `bytes[1]` as dynamically sized. I.e. the data as a whole does not have a fixed size even if it some parts of it some static or it's a part of an array with a fixed number of elements.

Basically, the dynamically-sized stuff is contagious and pollutes everything it touches :)

Reviewer: Yeah, I was mainly thinking in terms of ``Type::isDynamicallySized`` and ``Type::isDynamicallyEncoded`` in our code-base :-). (the former being false for ``bytes[1]``, the latter being true)
But we don't seem to use those terms in the docs actually...
https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.15/abi-spec.html talks about "fixed-size" or "fixed-length" arrays and "non-fixed-size types" and of "dynamic" types (``bytes[1]`` would be a dynamic fixed-size array according to that...)...

Maybe it's just fine to keep it at the current phrasing for the blog post in any case, just wanted to point out that there is some potential for ambiguity here.

Author: Hmm... I always had the impression that @chriseth was careful to always refer to them as "statically-sized" vs "dynamically-sized" over any other terms, including "dynamic" and "static". Maybe one day we should add a glossary or something to the docs to make sure we're all using the same terms :)

Anyway in the post I was paying attention to only use "statically-sized" and "dynamically-sized" and to use them consistently according so I'll leave that as is now.

Reviewer: Well, for arrays the terms are ``statically-sized`` and ``dynamically-sized`` - but ``bytes[1]`` counts as statically-sized and the usual phrase for it still being encode via tail pointers is ``dynamically encoded`` (also occurs in the bug list on a few occasions like that)

of the location within the tail where the data is stored.
This layout ensures that component locations within the head are fixed and any of them can be accessed without the need to decode all
the components that precede it.

#### Statically-sized Example

Let us consider the following example that encodes a tuple with no dynamically-sized components:
```solidity
struct S {
    address x;
    uint[3] y;
}

contract C {
    function f(bool a, S calldata b, bytes32[2] calldata c)
        public
        returns (bool, S calldata, bytes32[2] calldata)
    {
        return (a, b, c);
    }
}
```

An example call to `C.f()` with the following input:

```solidity
f(true, S(0x1111111111222222222233333333334444444444, [uint(11), 12, 13]), [bytes32("a"), "b"])
```

> should return the following values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should encode its return values as follows (which in this case is the same encoding that is used to pass the arguments to ``f``):
```
or something?
Might also be simpler to talk only about the argument encoding **or** the return value encoding, not some mixture...

Author: I tried to add that but I think that bringing attention to it actually seems a bit out of place (like, this detail is not really relevant to tuple encoding).

But yeah, the fact that the input and output are the same is also kinda distracting. So instead I reworked the examples. Now they do not return anything and I added a separate one for the bug. Check if that's better.

```solidity
struct T {
    bytes x;
    uint[3] y;
}

contract D {
    function f(bool a, T calldata b, bytes32[2] calldata c)
        public
        returns (bool, T calldata, bytes32[2] calldata)
    {
        return (a, b, c);
    }
}
```

In this case a call to `D.f()` with the following input:
```solidity
f(true, T("abcd", [uint(11), 12, 13]), [bytes32("a"), "b"])
```
results in a vastly different encoding:
```
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000001 a
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000080 offset of b
0x6100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 c[0]
0x6200000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 c[1]
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000080 offset of b.x
0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000b b.y[0]
0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000c b.y[1]
0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000d b.y[2]
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000004 b.x (length field)
0x6162636400000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 b.x (data)
```

> The introduction of a dynamically-sized element resulted in `T` becoming dynamically-sized as well.

Reviewer: Ah, yeah, this relates to what I meant in https://github.com/ethereum/solidity-blog/pull/187/files#r936962743...
Not sure if it's clearer to think of ``T`` as "becoming dynamically-sized"... it contains a dynamically sized type, but one can still view ``T`` itself as statically-sized... internally we say ```T`` becomes "dynamically-encoded"... but yeah, still not sure if reproducing that distinction is helpful :-).

Reviewer: Given the phrasing in https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.15/abi-spec.html we could at least change it to
```suggestion
The introduction of a dynamically-sized element resulted in `T` itself becoming a dynamic type.
```
or so...

Author: I'm going to stick to "dynamically-sized" as I said in https://github.com/ethereum/solidity-blog/pull/187#discussion_r937504773 but I'll change it to `` `T` itself becoming a dynamically-sized type``.

|------------+-------------+------------||----------------------------------------|
| value of a | offset of b | value of c ||              value of b                |
|    bool    |    uint     | bytes32[2] ||                   T                    |
|            |             |            ||--------------------------||------------|
|            |             |            ||          HEAD of T       || TAIL of T  |
|            |             |            ||-------------+------------||------------|
|            |             |            || offset of x | value of y || value of x |
|            |             |            ||    uint     |   uint[3]  ||    bytes   |
|------------+-------------+------------||-------------+------------||------------|
|     1      |      2      |      6     ||      3      |     5      ||      4     |
|------------+-------------+------------||-------------+------------||------------|
```

The encoding order was also affected.
This is because for each component, the encoder writes both the head and the tail before moving on to the next one.
This results in `c` being written after `b.x`, even though the former precedes the latter in the encoding.

> Similar situation happened inside `T` - when `y` is being written the data belonging to tail of `x` is already in place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A similar situation happens inside `T` - when `y` is being written the data belonging to the tail of `x` is already in place.
```

0x6100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 c[0]
0x6200000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 c[1]
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 offset of b.x       // Wrong value
0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000b b.y[0]
0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000c b.y[1]
0x000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000d b.y[2]
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 b.x (length field)  // Wrong value
0x6162636400000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000 b.x (data)
```

Here, the cleanup performed for `b.y` would overwrite the length field of `b.x`.
Similarly, the cleanup of `c` would overwrite the offset of `b.x`.

The case with a statically-sized tuple was not affected because, in absence of the tail, the encoding order is linear.
The encoder could still write past the end of the whole area reserved for the encoding but the compiler would be able
to ensure that the memory past it had not been allocated for another purpose, making the cleanup perfectly safe.

> The bug would only affect encoding of values stored in calldata because that was the only situation where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bug only affects the encoding of values stored in calldata because that was the only situation where
```

Although as mentioned above, IIUC, only the statically-sized array causing the cleanup has to come from calldata...

Author: Done, though it was meant to be past tense, so I used `affected` (doesn't `would affect` really convey the same meaning in this case?)

As for the `calldata` part, still working on fixing that in all parts of the post.

the IR-based generator for ABI encoding, the bug can be triggered when using either of them.

## Impact

The bug is very easy to trigger in contrived situations but requires a combination of multiple factors to manifest.
This seems to lower the likelihood of it being triggered, given that it remained undetected through several major releases.
It may, however, have gone unnoticed in the encoded data of events or errors.

Intentionally triggering the bug when calling a function is not exploitable because the caller can always just directly pass
modified input to the function being called.
Plausible attacks against affected contracts can only occur in situations where the contract accepts a static calldata
array as a part of its input and forwards it to another external call without modifying the content.

One of the scenarios that make the bug more likely is batching of orders:

```solidity
struct Order {
    User buyer;
    User seller;
    uint[2] values;
}

struct User {
    address account;
    string name;
}

contract Batcher {
    IMarket immutable market;

    function batchTransaction(Order[] calldata orders) external {
        for (uint i = 0; i < orders.length; ++i)

>             // batchTransaction() can see the original value of buyer.account.

Reviewer: I think you meant that here, but in particular ``batchTransaction`` might *act* on the values of ``buyer.account`` while expecting the transaction below to get the same value, resulting in potential problems - that'd be the worst situation, isn't it?
But yeah, that's basically implicit in the comment and I'm happy with the example now - it's significantly better than the last one :-).

Author: Yeah, that's implied but maybe could be clearer. I considered including something that actually uses the value, e.g. a transfer, but thought that it would complicate the example.

I can reword the comment though to bring more attention to that.

Author: Actually, thanks for this suggestion. I realized that I could just add a `require()` and this nicely shows the potential for this bug to bypass validations.

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Head Overflow Bug in Calldata Tuple ABI-Reencoding'
date: '2022-08-04'
author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---

On July 5, 2022, Chance Hudson ([@vimwitch](https://github.com/vimwitch)) from the Ethereum Foundation discovered a bug in the Solidity code generator.

The earliest affected version of the compiler is 0.5.8, which introduced ABI-reencoding of calldata arrays and structs.
[Solidity version 0.8.16](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.16), released on August 04, 2022, provides a fix.

We assigned the bug a severity of "medium".

## Which Contracts are Affected?

The effects of the bug manifest when a contract performs ABI-encoding of a tuple that meets **all** of the following conditions:

> 1. The last component of the tuple is a (potentially nested) staticallys-sized calldata array with the most base type being either `uint` or `bytes32`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The last component of the tuple is a (potentially nested) statically-sized calldata array with the most base type being either `uint` or `bytes32`.
```

Author: Thanks for spotting that! Fixed.

Similarly, the cleanup of `c` would overwrite the offset of `b.x`.

The case with a static tuple was not affected because, in absence of the tail, the encoding order is linear.
The encoder could still write past the end of the whole area reserved for the encoding but the compiler would be able
to ensure that the memory past it had not been allocated for another purpose, making the cleanup perfectly safe.

The bug only affected the encoding of tuples in the presence of a calldata array because that was the only situation where
the routine that performs the aggressive cleanup was used.
The routine is a part of the IR-based generator and runs regardless of the use of the optimizer.
Since the legacy code generation pipeline does not have its own ABI coder v2 implementation and uses
the IR-based generator for ABI encoding, the bug can be triggered when using either of them.

## Impact

The bug is very easy to trigger in contrived situations but requires a combination of multiple factors to manifest.
This seems to lower the likelihood of it being triggered, given that it remained undetected through several major releases.

> It may however have gone undetected in the encoded data of events or errors.

Author: I mean it's common to emit events with data you just might need even if you don't really use it. And with errors, if decoding a revert causes another revert that also might go unnoticed.

But yeah, it's a bit of a stretch, I just thought it might be worth highlighting that this may occur in events and errors too and it's harder to notice there.

> It may however have gone undetected in the encoded data of events or errors.

Reviewer: Yeah, fair enough.

> It may however have gone undetected in the encoded data of events or errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may, however, have gone undetected in the encoded data of events or errors.
```
